The common cold, also called viral rhinitis, is one of the most common infectious diseases in humans. The infection is usually mild and improves without treatment. Because of the large number of people who get the common cold, this illness results in nearly 26 million days of missed school and 23 million days of absence from work every year in the United States. The average American has 1 to 3 colds per year.

The common cold is an upper respiratory infection that is caused by several families of viruses. Within these virus families, more than 200 specific viruses that can cause the common cold have been identified. The virus family that causes the most colds is called rhinovirus. Rhinoviruses cause up to 40% of colds, and this virus family has at least 100 distinct virus types in its group. Other important upper respiratory virus families are named coronavirus, adenovirus and respiratory syncytial virus. Since so many viruses can cause cold symptoms, development of a vaccine for the common cold has not been possible.

Rhinoviruses cause most colds in the early fall and spring. Other viruses tend to cause winter colds and their symptoms can be more debilitating. There is no evidence that going out in cold or rainy weather makes you more likely to catch a cold.

Symptoms
The common cold causes a group of symptoms that are easily recognized by patients and doctors. About 50% of patients will develop a sore throat, which is often the first symptom to appear because it can occur as early as 10 hours after infection. This is followed by congestion in the nose and sinuses, a runny nose and sneezing. Hoarseness and cough can also occur and may last longer than other symptoms, sometimes for several weeks. High fevers are rare with the common cold.

Diagnosis
Most people diagnose the common cold by the typical symptoms of runny nose, congestion and sneezing. Usually it isn't necessary for you to see a health care provider. You should see a doctor if you develop a high fever, severe sinus pain, ear pain, shortness of breath or new wheezing. These are symptoms that suggest you either have something other than a cold or a complication of the cold.