Drug Abuse

Drug abuse isn't just about street drugs. Besides marijuana, legal medicines are the most commonly abused drugs in the U.S. Over-the-counter and prescription drugs can help and heal us. But some can be addictive and dangerous if they’re used the wrong way.
Keep your family safe. Use this guide to help you spot some commonly misused medicines. Because drugs come in many forms, not all pills and tablets are shown. Drug pictures are not to scale.

Rx Drug Abuse   Common and Dangerous
WebMD Home  next page Mental Health Center next page Substance Abuse and Addiction Health Center next page Alcohol Abuse Feature Stories Email a Friend Print Article
Substance Abuse and Addiction Health Center
Tools & Resources
What It's Like to Have ADHDRecognize Withdrawal Symptoms
Tips to Avoid a HangoverDrug & Alcohol Treatments
Street Drugs   Know the FactsCrystal Meth 101
Share this
Listen
Rx Drug Abuse   Common and Dangerous
What are the most abused prescription drugs, and what are the risks?
By Katherine Kam
WebMD Feature Reviewed by Louise Chang, MD
WebMD Feature Archive
In the 1970s, parents worried that their longhaired, bell-bottomed teenagers were getting drunk or smoking marijuana. Today, dangers also come in the form of prescription medicines -- from opioid pain relievers such as OxyContin to ADHD drugs such as Ritalin.

Prescription drug abuse appears to be on the rise in this country. Wilson Compton, MD, director of the division of epidemiology services and prevention research at the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), says the reasons aren't clear.

But he suspects that increasing numbers of prescriptions written for certain drugs, such as ADHD medications, afford greater opportunity. "A certain portion of those will be diverted for abuse purposes," he says.

Compton also says that in the current environment it seems almost normal to pop pills. "All of the advertising for pills may play a role in our willingness to try them."

Roughly 6.3 million Americans report that they're currently using prescription drugs for nonmedical reasons, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

