$3B in Cancer Drugs Thrown Away
Smaller packaging could cut spending on cancer drugs by $3 billion, according to a new report.
Little change was seen in the final version released to Congress.
"PhRMA remains concerned about the sweeping recommendations MedPAC approved in April and opposes changes to Medicare Part D that taken together could harm beneficiaries by eroding coverage and protections for many of the most vulnerable enrollees in the program," said Allyson Funk, spokeswoman for the drug industry's trade group PhRMA.
Some proposals have been rejected before, but the report could spark discussion under a new administration and Congress in 2017.
"Once MedPAC makes a recommendation, it gives it legitimacy," said Sanders. "In future years, we could see the proposals as a starting point for some legislation."
Lawmakers have been searching for solutions to drug spending amid headlines about skyrocketing prices, but a study published Tuesday suggests a fix may be much simpler than anyone thought   requiring drug-makers to sell their products in smaller packages.
If the U.S. were to target the packaging of cancer drugs, in particular, the government,  and private health insurance companies would save nearly $3 billion a year, according to the report, published in the medical journal BMJ. Many of the top-selling cancer medicines in the U.S. only come in one-size vials, even though the amount of drugs they contain is more than what most  need. After administering the dosage, nurses throw away any leftovers, but  and their insurers still must pay for the drug in full.

Phase II, which could start as early as January 2017, is potentially even scarier. This phase will test something known as value-based purchasing arrangements – arrangements that link payment for medications to  outcomes and cost-effectiveness rather than just the quantity of treatments.
Although CMS is uncertain which specific arrangements it will test, and there are some good ideas in the potential list, some of the possibilities could produce harmful consequences. Namely, value-based purchasing arrangements that set a standard payment rate for a group of similar drug products, such as reference pricing, will effectively act like a price control, because the only way certain drugs will be available is if drug companies agree to offer them at that set rate. And as I explain in a recent study, price controls – whether direct or indirect – are a bad idea for prescription drugs for several reasons.
First, if the set payment rate is calculated as some percentage off current prices – one approach CMS proposes – then drug companies will have an incentive to raise prices. In fact, evidence shows that existing price controls have contributed to higher launch prices of drugs as drug companies act to offset the required percentage rebate.
[What Doctors Can Learn From Small Farming]
Second, because the new proposals will only apply to drugs sold under the Medicare Part B program, drug companies have the incentive to charge even higher prices to other noncovered  outside of Medicare to offset the discounts. Indeed, numerous studies and government analyses have concluded that required discounts under Medicaid and Medicare have resulted in increased prices for other consumers as manufacturers seek to offset revenue lost under price controls.

Third, price controls contribute to drug shortages   At a below-market price, the demand for drugs exceeds the amount of drugs that manufacturers are willing or able to sell. Indirect price controls, such as reference pricing, that effectively require drug companies to sell at lower prices could similarly result in drug shortages.

Lastly, price controls hinder innovation in the pharmaceutical industry. On average, brand drug companies will spend $2.6 billion to bring each new drug to market with FDA approval. They must offset these significant costs with revenues earned during the patent period; within 3 months after patent expiry, generic competitors will have al y captured over 70 percent of the brand drugs' market share and significantly eroded their profits. Requiring drug companies to offer drugs under patent at significantly lower prices increases the risk that drug companies will not earn the profits they need to justify their development costs. This will result in pharmaceutical companies spending less money on research and development and developing fewer new lifesaving drugs.

