A nurse hangs the medicine, as Shawn Kuykendall, 31, goes through his fifth and final round of chemotherapy at MedStar Georgetown University Hospital on Oct. 17, 2013, in Washington, D.C.
Global Cancer Spending Reaches $100B
Smaller packaging is available in European countries, where the government plays a larger role in drug pricing, but the author's studies did not evaluate the impact there. A global spending report by IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics released in May 2015 shows that the U.S. spends more on cancer drugs than any other , comprising 42.2 percent of $100 billion in total spending.
Policymakers have been scrutinizing the practices of pharmaceutical companies in recent months, particularly following the release of data that revealed in 2014 the  growth in spending on medicines was double that of other health care sectors – due in large part to expensive specialty drugs that hit the market, many of which are for cancer treatment.
"This is a rare opportunity to lower costs for  and our healthcare system in a manner that cannot adversely affect health outcomes," Bach said.
The Obama administration announced a proposal this month that amounts to backdoor price controls, and it could have significant unintended consequences for the people it was designed to help –.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has proposed to experiment with Medicare Part B's program payment model for prescription drugs administered in a physician's office or hospital out department – like a flu vaccine or an infusion therapy for rheumatoid arthritis or cancer treatments, to name a few.
According to CMS, the purpose of this experiment is to test whether a new Part B drug payment model affects physician and  incentives and steers  to drugs that are more effective or of better value. CMS proposes to divide the test into two phases. Under Phase I, which could start 60 days after the final rule is released, all medical providers in the U.S. participating in the Part B program will be divided into two groups to test the effects of different drug reimbursement payments. Criticisms from across the health care spectrum have emerged, and while researchers typically relish the idea of such a large-scale controlled experiment, it does seem potentially reckless when the experiment involves drugs that are critical to  survival, such as many cancer treatments that are covered under Part B.


A picture taken on September 13, 2012 in Paris shows pills and medicines.            AFP/MIGUEL MEDINA        (Photo credit should   MIGUEL MEDINA/AFP/GettyImages)
Not Up For Negotiation
To conduct the study, researchers at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and the University of Chicago projected the total cost of spending on cancer drugs in 2016 at $18 billion, then examined the top 20 cancer drugs that filled two main criteria   those administered in specific doses according to a  body size, and those only sold in a single packaging size. They looked at how much of each drug was left over, and at the revenue for each drug, finding that about 10 percent of total spending would be wasted. In total, they projected $1.8 billion went to drug companies for medicines that ultimately end up in the trash.
"This is all due to decisions about how much drug companies decide to put in each single dose vial," Dr. Peter Bach, director at the Center for Health Policy and Outcomes at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, said in a statement. "They almost certainly realize how these decisions translate into revenue."
Hospitals and doctors also profit from administering the drugs by including a mark-up in a  medical bill every time they are used. These markups, estimated at an average of 22 percent for doctors and 142 percent for hospitals, total an additional $1 billion in spending a year on drugs that go to waste. Much of the burden for paying for these drugs goes to  themselves, to the private insurance companies who cover them, and to Medicare, the government-run program that covers seniors and people who are disabled.
As much as a third of the drug rituximab, which treats lymphomas and leukemias, is projected to be discarded every time it is administered, totaling excess spending of $254 million. About 27 percent to 30 percent of another drug, bortezomib, which multiple myeloma, is projected to be wasted, resulting in excess spending of $309 million. Though bortezomib comes only in 2.5 mg vials in the U.S., in the United Kingdom the drug is sold in 1 mg vials.
Authors of the study point out that leftover drugs are rarely used on other , in part because safety standards only allow for them to be used no more than six hours after the drug has been opened.
[MORE    America's Most Expensive Medicare Presciption Drugs]
When asked about the report, Allyson Funk, senior director of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, or PhRMA, said in a statement that decisions about a vial's size were tied to how a product was approved, and took into account that different have different needs. She brought attention to the fact that approval of smaller packaging would take months, given that new data would need to be collected and that new packaging would need approval from the Food and Drug Administration.
"Manufacturers are committed to working with FDA and Congress to create a more nimble regulatory approval process that enables manufacturers to modify their products as we learn about the safety, efficacy and manufacturing of new medicines from the real world clinical setting," she said.
